---
title: Open-Closed Principle (OCP)
date: 2022-10-24 18:00:00 +0800
categories: [Blogging, Technology, Software Development, Design Principle, SOLID]
tags: [design principle, solid, ocp]
---

>**Open-Closed Principle (OCP)** suggest that **entities like methods, modules, classes, etc. should be open for extension but closed for modification.** **Open for extension** means application's class should be easy for implementing new features or methods. **Closed for modification** means application's class should not be modify unless there's a bugs to fix.

## Reason for Implementing Open-Closed Principle

- The reason for the implementation of OCP is because the already developed class/module has gone through the unit testing phase. So **if we added new functionality into the class, the class/module has to go through the unit testing phase again along with the new functionality**.
- By implementing OCP, it will not affect the existing class/modules or its functionalities, because OCP doesn't allow changes. Thus, preventing unwanted bugs.
- If not implementing OCP it will also breaks the [Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)](/posts/solid-srp/) as the class is going to hold multiple responsibilities.

## How to Implement Open-Closed Principle

1. By **implementing inheritance of the already existence class.** By creating a new derived class it should be able to inherit from the existing class/base class and could also creating a new functionalities with it.
2. By enabling access to the existing class/base class/original class using an **abstract interface**.

## Example: Without Open-Closed Principle

```c#
public class Role
{
 public string CheckRole(string userInput)
 {
  string result = null;

  if ("Worker" == userInput)
  {
   result = "Worker"
   return result;
  }
  else if("Customer" == userInput)
  {
   result = "Customer";
   return result;
  }
 }
}
```

- Above shows already developed `Role`'s class that has `if-else if` statement to filter out the `userInput`. In case we want to add another option, we have to add another `else if` block statement which is against the OCP, this is because the `Role` class will need to be modify each times there's new changes.
- In addition, we have to run unit testing again to ensure the old and the new functionalities are working properly, which is time consuming and redundant.

## Example: With Open-Closed Principle

```c#
namespace SOLID_OCP
{
 public class Role
 {
  public virtual string CheckRole(string userInput)
  {
   return userInput = "Owner";
  }
 }

 public class StaffRole : Role
 {
  public override string CheckRole(string userInput)
  {
   return userInput = "Staff"
  }
 }
 
 public class CustomerRole : Role
 {
  public override string CheckRole(string userInput)
  {
   return userInput = "Customer"
  }
 }
 
 public class SupplierRole : Role
 {
  public override string CheckRole(string userInput)
  {
   return userInput = "Supplier"
  }
 }
}
```

- Above snippet shows an updated version of the previous snippet with the implementation of **Open-Closed Principle (OCP**). The program consist of  one base class `Role` and three derived classes `StaffRole`, `CustomerRole`, `SupplierRole`.
- The `StaffRole`, `CustomerRole`, `SupplierRole` classes are inherited from the base class `Role` which enable them to override the `CheckRole()` if they want too.
- Later in the future, if there's a new role require to be added, then we only need to create a new derived class from the `Role` class instead of modifying the existing classes.
- **By not changing the code inside the `Role` class or base class and creating derived class, we've already implementing Open-Closed Principle (OCP).**

> "Software entities (classes, modules, functions, etc...) should be open for extension, but closed for modifications.". - Open-Closed Principle > by Robert C. Martin
{: .prompt-info }

---

## Sources

1. [Open-Closed Principle (OCP)](https://dotnettutorials.net/lesson/open-closed-principle/)
