---
title: Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)
date: 2022-10-24 18:00:00 +0800
categories: [Blogging, Technology, Software Development, Design Principle, SOLID]
tags: [design principle, solid, dip]
---

> **Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)** suggests that classes should be loosely couple with one another, instead of relying directly to each other, classes that want to integrate other classes should use abstraction/interface as its intermediary and these abstraction shouldn't be relying on other entities like information/detail but this entities should be the one relying on that abstraction.

## Why Dependency Inversion Principle Important

- Prevent application to break, without DIP, It can break other classes if try to make changes on the class that it relies on. which make it harder to maintain.
- Easy to extend, feature of the class can be reuse elsewhere.

## What is Abstraction

- Abstraction can be refer as a representation of something, with abstraction, we don't need to create an instance from it. This also can be called as `non-concrete` class
- Classes that are able to be use for the creation of an object or to be instantiate upon is called a `concrete` class.

## Example: Without Dependency Inversion Principle

Based on the collection of snippets below, it shows that the classes are concrete type of class which depends on another via instantiation and the creation of an object, and this is against the **Dependency Inversion Principle**. A better implementation is to create an `abstraction` which will act as mediary parties for these classes.

- Below shows `Customer.cs` class, that contains four simple properties in it that will be use by other classes later.

```c#
// Customer.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class Customer
 {
  public int Id { get; set; }
  public string Name { get; set; }
  public string Email { get; set; }
  public string Address { get; set; }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `CustomerDataFetchLogic.cs` class, this class contains one method that takes customer's id and return customer's information.

```c#
// CustomerDataFetchLogic.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class CustomerDataFetch
 {
  public Customer GetCustomerDetails(int id)
  {
   // In real project, data will be fetch from the db
   // but for tutorial sake, data will be hard coded
   Customer cust = new Customer()
   {
    Id = id;
    Name = "John Bin Doe"
    Email = "Johnkacak@gmail.com"
    Address = "John Land 123, Taman John, Johnlisia"
   };

   return cust;
  }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `CustomerBusinessLogic.cs` class,  that has one constructor called `CustomerBusinessLogic()` to create an instance of `CustomerDataFetch`.
- Within the constructor `GetCustomerDataObj()` method from `DataHandlerSection` class is use to fetch a `CustomerDataFetch` instance and initialize it with `_CustomerDataFetch`.
- This class also holds one method called `GetCustomerDetails(int id)` that is used to call `GetCustomerDetails(id)` method from `CustomerDataFetch` class to return `Customer`'s details based on `Id` property that been given by the user.

```c#
// CustomerBusinessLogic.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class CustomerBusinessLogic
 {
  CustomerDataFetch _CustomerDataFetch;
  public CustomerBusinessLogic()
  {
   _CustomerDataFetch = DataHandlerSection.GetCustomerDataObj();
  }

  public Customer GetCustomerDetails(int id)
  {
   return _CustomerDataFetch.GetCustomerDetails(id);
  }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `DataHandlerSection.cs` class that contain one static method `GetCustomerDataObj()` which return the instance of the `CustomerDataFetch()` class though defining a new `CustomerDataFetch` class.

```c#
// DataHandlerSection.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public static CustomerDataFetch GetCustomerDataObj()
 {
  return new CustomerDataFetch()
 }
}
```

## Example: With Dependency Inversion Principle

Collection of snippets below will show the DIP implementation, which will done to the previous snippets. As you can see the different between this section and the previous one is that `CustomerBusinessLogic.cs`  class doesn't rely directly on `CustomerDataFetch`  class.

- Below shows `Customer.cs` class, that contains four simple properties in it that will be use by other classes later. This is similar as the previous section.

```c#
// Customer.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class Customer
 {
  public int Id { get; set; }
  public string Name { get; set; }
  public string Email { get; set; }
  public string Address { get; set; }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `ICustomerDataAccess.cs` class, that contains and interface or abstraction for `CustomerDataFetch.GetCustomerDetails(id)`  

```c#
// ICustomerDataAccess.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public interface ICustomerDataAccess
 {
  Customer GetCustomerDetails(int id);
 }
}
```

- Below shows `CustomerDataFetchLogic.cs` class, this class contains one method that takes customer's id and return customer's information.
- The implementation for this file on previous section is different, for this section, this classes use `ICustomerDataAccess` as its reference.

```c#
// CustomerDataFetchLogic.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class CustomerDataFetch : ICustomerDataAccess
 {
  public Customer GetCustomerDetails(int id)
  {
   // In real project, data will be fetch from the db
   // but for tutorial sake, data will be hard coded
   Customer cust = new Customer()
   {
    Id = id;
    Name = "John Bin Doe"
    Email = "Johnkacak@gmail.com"
    Address = "John Land 123, Taman John, Johnlisia"
   };

   return cust;
  }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `CustomerBusinessLogic.cs` class,  that has one constructor called `CustomerBusinessLogic()` to create an instance of `CustomerDataFetch`.
- Within the constructor `GetCustomerDataObj()` method from `DataHandlerSection` class is use to fetch a `CustomerDataFetch` instance and initialize it with `_CustomerDataFetch`.
- This class also holds one method called `GetCustomerDetails(int id)` that is used to call `GetCustomerDetails(id)` method from `CustomerDataFetch` class to return `Customer`'s details based on `Id` property that been given by the user.
- The implementation for this file is different from the previous section, this is because instead of using `CustomerDataFetch` to initialize a new object, we use `ICustomerDataAccess` interface.

```c#
// CustomerBusinessLogic.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public class CustomerBusinessLogic
 {
  ICustomerDataAccess _CustomerDataFetch;
  public CustomerBusinessLogic()
  {
   _CustomerDataFetch = DataHandlerSection.GetCustomerDataObj();
  }

  public Customer GetCustomerDetails(int id)
  {
   return _CustomerDataFetch.GetCustomerDetails(id);
  }
 }
}
```

- Below shows `DataHandlerSection.cs` class that contain one static method `GetCustomerDataObj()` which return the instance of the `IEmployeeDataAccess` interface though defining a new `CustomerDataFetch` class.
- The implementation for this file is different from the previous section, this is because the return type for `GetCustomerDataObj()` is changed from `CustomerDataFetch` to `IEmployeeDataAccess`.

```c#
// DataHandlerSection.cs
namespace SOLID_DIP
{
 public static IEmployeeDataAccess GetCustomerDataObj()
 {
  return new CustomerDataFetch()
 }
}
```

---

## Sources

1. [Dependency Inversion Principle](https://dotnettutorials.net/lesson/dependency-inversion-principle/)
