---
title: SOLID
date: 2022-10-24 18:00:00 +0800
categories: [Blogging, Technology, Software Development, Design Principle]
tags: [design principle, solid]
---

> **SOLID design principle** is a design framework to help developer structure their application strategically so that their application's design is easy to understand, maintainable, extendable, testable, flexible to changes and prevent unwanted bugs.

## Advantages of using SOLID

- **Maintainable**: Able to implement new changes with ease, less effort and without any unwanted hiccup to the application.
- **Testable:** By implementing [Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)](/posts/solid-srp/) within the entire application, it can make testing application's functionalities feasible.
- **Flexible & Extendable**: Ensure the application is flexible to work with any different kind of environment, make the process of adding a new features easier, less effort.
- **Parallel Development**: Enable team members to work in the same application without worrying their work can affecting others. Enable different team member to work on different module or functionalities.
- **Reduce code complexity**: Ensure the codebase is understandable to other people.
- **Reusable**: Ensure that functionalities, library, class and etc. can be use across different segments of the application or another application.

## SOLID Acronyms

1. **S** - [Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)](/posts/solid-srp/)
2. **O** - [Open-Closed Principle (OCP)](/posts/solid-ocp/)
3. **L** - [Liskov's Substitution Principle (LSP)](/posts/solid-lsp/)
4. **I** - [Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)](/posts/solid-isp/)
5. **D** - [Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)](/posts/solid-dip/)

---

## Sources

1. [Solid Design Principles](https://dotnettutorials.net/course/solid-design-principles/)
