---
title: API
date: 2022-10-03 16:36:00 +0800
categories: [Blogging, Technology, Software Development]
tags: [programming, api]
---

## Definition
**Application Programming Interface (API)** is a mediatory medium that **defined a set of rules** that tells developer on how to communicate with another application or network devices programmatically. 

By knowing the defined rule, developer **can expose or consume the APIs to exchange information** from any location or device securely.


## How it operates?
1. Client side **request** an information to the web server using API Calls. 
	- This API call not just send request, it will also fetch a response from the server afterward.
	  
2. Server process the request from API and send back the response. 
	- Server will determine whether the request is valid or not. 
	- If valid it will send back the requested data, else it will send back an error message. 
	  
3. Client side receive a **response** based on its previous request.  


## Is it secure?
Based on the API Definition, it stated that the APIs is built with a set of rules in mind. Which mean, the developer or people that want to consume or expose the API are require to follow a specific set of rules first. These requirements or rules are the one that are responsible in making the APIs secure.

Below is an example of API's rules:
> - Usually, an API calls is require to include **authorization credentials** to reduce the risk of getting hack by the unwanted parties.
> - API Gateway can be use to limit access to the server thru an API Calls.
> - Necessary Requirement during exchanging data using an APIs like HTTP Headers, Cookies or query string parameters can also provide additional wall of security.
{: .prompt-info }


## Type of APIs
1. **Open API** - Is also knows as public APIs where it can be access by the public, this API accessible using HTTP. 
   
2.  **Partner API** - This API only exposes to only certain parties or business partner. Usually people that wanted to use this APIs require to register first before they're able to receive any necessary credential from that APIs provider. 
   
3. **Internal API** - This is a private APIs that have strict access to the outside user. This API is only for the internal usage within the organization. 
   
4. **Composite API** - Made up of various part of data or API services. Where these services allow access to multiple endpoint or feature with only using one call. This is useful if you want to fetch various information. 


## API Protocol
API protocol is a defined set of rule or technique for using an API, APIs protocol is needed to use an API properly, API protocol is also known as Network Protocol, below is some of the example of APIs Protocol:
1. SOAP
2. XML-RPC
3. JSON-RPC
4. REST API / RESTful API


## API Architecture Approaches
In every software out there, require some sort of architecture that need to be use as a building block, without them the software quality will be absolute terrible and nightmare to handle. 

Same goes for an APIs, it also require an architecture to work properly. There's two architecture approaches: 

1. Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA)
2. Microservice Architecture

---
# Sources:
1. [What is an API?](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/api)