---
title: Liskov's Substitution Principle (LSP)
date: 2022-10-24 18:00:00 +0800
categories: [Blogging, Technology, Software Development, Design Principle, SOLID]
tags: [design principle, solid, lsp]
---

> **Liskov's Substitution Principle (LSP)** suggest that the derived class must be able to substitute its parent class, meaning whatever methods and properties the parent class has, it should be implemented inside the derived class as well. This principle doesn't allow to **NOT** implement/use a certain method of the parent class within the derived class. It also doesn't allow to add new functionally that doesn't available in the parent class. Derived class must obey and follow all the implementation from their parent class.

## Benefit of using Liskov's Substitution Principle

- Ensure that the application design are not tightly coupled.
- Ensure flexibility in maintaining and extending functionality.
- Ensure readability within the codebase.
- Ensure the application to run correctly. Without any unwanted output.

## Example: Wrong Liskov's Substitution Principle Usage

- Below contains a snippet, that have an interface called `IPlayerInfo` along with two class that uses the interface, which is a`NormalPlayer` and `ProPlayer` but only one of the classes that uses `bool PlayerStatus`.
- Inside `ProPlayer`'s classes, `bool PlayerStatus` is not being used by the class's scope, this actually go against the LSP, where the derived class (`NormalPlayer` & `ProPlayer`) are required to use all the properties and methods that has been defined inside the parent class/interface (`IPlayerInfo`). This behavior will triggered a butterfly effect later down the line.
- Derived class should obey their parent class/interface, implement all the properties and methods, don't add new implementation within the derived class which doesn't actually exist inside the parent class/interface.

```c#
public interface IPlayerInfo
{
 bool PlayerStatus {get;set;}
 void PlayerDialog(string message);
}

public class NormalPlayer: IPlayerInfo
{
 public NormalPlayer()
 {
 }

 public bool PlayerStatus {get;set;}
 public void PlayerDialog(string message)
 {
  if (PlayerStatus)
  {
   // take action
  } 
  else 
  {
   // take action
  }
 }
}

public class ProPlayer: IPlayerInfo
{
 public ProPlayer()
 {
 }

 public bool PlayerStatus {get;set;}
 public void PlayerDialog(string message)
 {
  // take action
 }
}
```

## Example: Without Liskov's Substitution Principle

- Below shows a snippet of a program that doesn't implement LSP, as we can see below, that `Bmw` is the base class while `Ferarri` is the derived class.
- What this program is trying to achieve, is to make `Bmw` (base class) holds a `Ferrari`'s `MaxSpeed` value  instead of using the default value. This is against the LSV this is because there's a behavioral changes which against the principle's rules happening.
- Supposedly the `MaxSpeed` value for `Bmw` should not change and remain the same. Base's class rules is absolute and the derived class must obey it. If the base's class already has a value then the derived class can't change it.

```c#
namespace SOLID_LSV
{
 class Program
 {
  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
   Bmw bmw = new Ferrari();
   Console.WriteLine(bmv.GetMaxSpeed());
  }
 }

 public class Bmw
 {
  public virtual number GetMaxSpeed()
  {
   return 313;
  }
 }

 public class Ferrari: Bmw
 {
  public override string GetMaxSpeed()
  {
   return 666;
  }
 }
}
```

## Example: With Liskov's Substitution Principle

- Below shows a snippet for a program that implement LSV, and also the improve version of the previous snippet. As we can see below instead of making `Bmw` as the base/parent class, `Car`'s abstract/generic class is created to act as the base class.
- By making `Car`'s the base class for the `Bmw` and `Ferrari` classes, behavioral changes can be prevent from occurring. Thus, now the program can make base/parent reference variable can holds any `MaxSpeed`'s value from `Bmw` or `Ferrari`.
- Implementing LSV within this program will ensure maintainability, extendibility and reusability.

```c#
namespace SOLID_LSV
{
 class Program
 {
  static void Main(string[] args)
  {
   Car car = new Bmw();
   Console.WriteLine(car.GetMaxSpeed());

   Car car = new Ferrari();
   Console.WriteLine(car.GetMaxSpeed());
  }
 }

 public abstract class Car
 {
  public abstract number GetMaxSpeed();
 }

 public class Bmw : Car
 {
  public override number GetMaxSpeed()
  {
   return 313;
  }
 }

 public class Ferrari : Car
 {
  public override string GetMaxSpeed()
  {
   return 666;
  }
 }
}
```

---

## Sources

1. [Dot Net Tutorials - Liskov Substitution Principle in C#](https://dotnettutorials.net/lesson/liskov-substitution-principle/)
2. [Code Project, Harleydk - SOLID Principles, in Layman's Terms: Liskov Substitution](https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/724237/SOLID-Principles-in-Laymans-Terms-Liskov-Substitut)
